# Robotic-Fire-Alarm-Safety-System
## No.3 https://proteusresearch.org/Volume-11-Issue-6-2020/
## https://aegaeum.com/index.php/volume-7-issue-1-2019/
Android based Robotic Fire Alert System to Save Fire VictimsM. A. Majed1, Ambreen Fatema 2, S. M. A Muneer Mogni3Associate Prof. 1 Assistant Prof.2 , Scholar3Dept of ECE 1 and EIE 1, 2 ,
Deccan College of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad, India.
smamuneermogni@gmail.com
Abstract — A Robotic systems that interact among themselves and the environment in which it works. In robotics, endeffecters are the devices at the end of a robotic arm, is designed to interact with the environment. Gripper is an end effecteror tool to grasp any object. In this work we are going to build a fire alert system to save fire victims using Arduinomicrocontroller (Atmega328), which will save the victims in fire accidents. In this work the wireless connectivity is throughBluetooth modem and controlling through android application by particular commands, which then allows the Arduino todetermine the position of DC motors. The fire victims are sense through PIR sensor and then information will be passes viabluetooth to android application. The robot would be controlled by the rescue team to save the fire victims. The sensitiveinformation into text as transmitter and receiver will be perform many other functions using certain commands programmedin the arduino (Atmega328). This work can be very useful for industries, defence, surgical purposes and so on so forth.Keywords— Arduino UNO R3 (Atmega328), Bluetooth, DC Motors. Fire Sensor, KEIL Compiler, L293D, PIR, Robotic Arm,Sensor.I. I NTRODUCTIONRobotics is one of the fastest growing engineering fields of today to work in unreachable environment. With such device,people and property can be saved at a much higher rate with relatively minimal damage caused by the fire. The design of awireless controlled robot which can perform actions intelligently by itself. Mobile robots are used in mining, military, forestry,security, etc. Robot technology can be very efficiently used in such cases to rescue much more fire victims. In this work wehave two ends, namely, Transmitter end and Receiver end. On receiver end, there is a vehicle, it has Arduino Atmega328 whichis interfaced with input and output devices, used to control vehicle. On the transmitter end, there is an android phone withandroid application, wireless signals are sent to transmitter side via Bluetooth module by android phone to control vehicle.Mobile robot control is done through mobile OS. The arm is placed on a moving vehicle and through different commands therobot is able to move in all directions. This vehicle uses four servo motors for the operation. It has arm assembly with a jaw.One servo motor allows the robotic arm to grab the object and other one allows the movement in upward and downwarddirection. The other two servo motors are to be attached with the robotic arm base that gives an advantage to move the base inforward and backward direction. Arduino acts as an interface to the Motors, Bluetooth modem and Android mobile which has aBluetooth application present in the mobile. This system has 10 independent commands for the gripper to open and close, elbowupward and downward, base clockwise and counters clockwise, base forward and backward directions left, right forward andbackward by arduino application.II. L ITERATURE SURVEYWith the invention of such device, people and property can be saved at a much higher rate with relatively minimal damagecaused by the fire[1]. The design of a wireless controlled robot from a distance or which can perform actions intelligently byitself, which will reduce the risk of this task of fire fighting. Mobile robots are used in mining, military, forestry, security, etc.Robot technology can be very efficiently used in such cases to rescue much more victims [2]. In present fire fighting system,fire fighters have to fight against fire from very closer technical persons had worked on it to improve it. They have useddifferent techniques to implement this. Before deciding our method to implement innovative fire extinguishing vehicle, we havestudied many research papers regarding to our topic. This work includes different methods for the purpose of fire fighting [3].There are sensors connected on each and every side of vehicle to detect flame and according to that the vehicle navigatestowards fire to extinguish it. But this method gives delayed output so takes more time to fulfil the task and has less accuracy [4].The Idea about the Android software “Blue control” and its application in controlling Robotics is described in the Google playstore website. From all these we find a different controlling technique using android device and software with a differentapproach for soft catching arm (electronic pressure sensor) [5]. The robotic vehicle is designed with a soft catching gripper thatcan be controlled by android OS based smart phone available in the market for remote operation[6]. The android applicationdevice transmitter will acts as a remote control while the receiver end Bluetooth device is fed to the microcontroller to drive DCmotors via motor driver IC for necessary work. Remote operation is achieved by any Smart phone with Android OS, upon aGUI (Graphical User Interface) based touch screen operation. Users friendly and inexpensive in price are some of theadvantages of Bluetooth technology used in controlling the robotic vehicle. Therefore controlling the robotic vehicle by smartphone will come true [7].PROTEUS JOURNALVOLUME 11 ISSUE 6 2020ISSN/eISSN: 0889-6348http://proteusresearch.org/ Page No: 12
III. ROBOTIC SYSTEM DESIGNThe Functional block diagram of proposed system is as shown in Fig.1, the hardware components are Atmega 328microcontroller, PIR sensor, DC motor, and power supply.Fig. 1 Functional Block diagramThe main scope of work is to send commands from one android phone to be received by Bluetooth module mounted on therobot. The controller also connected to the Bluetooth module, which sends information to rescue person about the dangerousarea where robot is running. It can send the required information in the form of text to the rescue team. The required power is of13 Ah battery with voltage of 12 V.A. Bluetooth ModemBluetooth serial communication module has two work modes, order-response work mode and automatic connection workmode. And there are three work roles (Master, Slave and Loopback) at the automatic connection work mode. When the moduleis at the automatic connection work mode, it will follow the default way set lastly to transmit the data automatically as shown inFig. 2. When the module is at the order-response work mode, user can send the AT command to set the control parameters andsend control order, specification is as shown in Table II.Fig. 2 Bluetooth Modem with Ardino Uno and sensorsB. Arduino UNO R3The Arduino Uno is a microcontroller board based on the ATmega328. As shown in Fig. 2. It has 14 digital input/output pins,6 analog inputs, a 16 MHz ceramic resonator, a USB connection, a power jack, an ICSP header, and a reset button. It containseverything needed to support the microcontroller, As shown in Fig. 3. Simply connect it to a computer with a USB cable orpower it with an AC-to-DC adapter or battery to get started, the detail specification is shown in Table II.C. PIR sensorThe detected radiations are converted into an electrical charge, which is proportional to the detected level of the radiation asshown in Fig 2. Then this charge is further improved by a built in FET and fed to the output pin of the device which becomesapplicable to an external circuit for further triggering and amplification of the alarm stages.D. Fire sensorA flame sensor module, that consists of a flame sensor (IR receiver), resistor, capacitor, potentiometer, and comparatorLM393 as shown in Fig. 2. It can detect infrared light with a wavelength ranging from 700nm to 1000nm.The far-infrared flameprobe converts the light detected in the form of infrared light into current changes. Sensitivity is adjusted through the onboardvariable resistor with a detection angle of 60o degrees. Working voltage is between 3.3v and 5.2v DC, with a digital output toindicate the presence of a signal. Sensing is conditioned by an LM393 comparator.PROTEUS JOURNALVOLUME 11 ISSUE 6 2020ISSN/eISSN: 0889-6348http://proteusresearch.org/ Page No: 13
E. Wrist and End effectorsIt has a spur gear meshing with a worm gear with a 12V stepper motor and two end effectors out of which one is fixed andanother is movable, as shown in Fig. 3.Fig. 3 Wrist and end effectors with Stepper MotorF. MotorsThere are two magnetic fields produced in the motor as shown in Fig.3. One magnetic field is produced by the permanentmagnets and the other magnetic field is produced by the electrical current flowing in the motor windings. These two fields resultin a torque which tends to rotate the rotor. As the rotor turns, the current in the windings is commutated to produce a continuousTable IICOMPONENTS SPECIFICATIONComponents SpecificationsBluetooth FrequencyModulationSensitivitySpeedAsynchronousSynchronousPower supplyWorking temperatureDimensionv2.0+EDR2.4GHz ISM bandLess than 4 dBm,Less than to84 dBm2.1Mbps(Max)1Mbps/1Mbps+3.3VDC 50mA20 ~ + 75o Centigrade26.9mm x 13mm x 2.2 mmArduino MicrocontrollerOperating VoltageInput VoltageDigital I/O PinsAnalog Input PinsDC Current per I/O PinFlash MemorySRAMEEPROMClock SpeedATmega3285V7-12V14640 mA32 KB of which 0.5 KB2 KB (ATmega328)1 KB (ATmega328)16 MHzPIR Sensor SizeOutputSensitivity rangePower supplyRectangular3V up to 20 feet (6m)110° x 70° range5V-12V input voltageFire Sensor WavelengthTemperatureVoltage700nm to 1000nm60 degrees3.3v and 5.2vArm Manipulator WeightLength30×2=60 gm for big arm 10×2=20 gm for small arm25 cm for big arm 5cm for small arm 2.33Motors Step angleSpeedVoltageSupply current1.8degrees100 rpm9 V0.5 A DCShaft Diameter of shaftLength of shaftBearing type15 cm28 cmBall bearingG. Robotic system of gripper linksThe object to be lifted is by Metal Plates and weight of the object is 50-80gm the link has two parts, Part1 and Part2.The Arm manipulator has length as Part1 = 25 cm and Part 2 = 5 cm. Therefore, the ratio of the length of the two links isLink1: Link 2 = 5: 1. Design Length of shaft = 24mm, Torque (T) = 42 N-m and Tangential force on gear =  , Where,(D) = Diameter of gear = (2x42)/0.025 = 3360 N, Twisting moment (T) = 47.18 N-m.Normal load acts on gear teeth is,  = (3360/0.937) = 3585 N (1)PROTEUS JOURNALVOLUME 11 ISSUE 6 2020ISSN/eISSN: 0889-6348http://proteusresearch.org/ Page No: 14
Maximum bending moment,(M) =  = (3585x0.025)/4 =21.51 N-m (2)Power and Torque Transmitted,If Voltage = 220 V, Current = 0.4 A and Speed = 20 rpm, then Power transmitted = VI*P = (220*0.4) = 88 wattTorque calculations,Torque=  = ∗∗ = 42 Nm (3)H. Force calculation of jointsThis will provide a fundamental understanding of moment arm calculations for statics and dynamics. Choose theseparameters weight of each linkage weight of each joint weight of object to lift length of each linkage. This particular design hasjust two degree of freedom (DOF) that requires lifting, and the centre of mass of each linkage is assumed to be acting at half ofthe length.Torque about Joint 1M1 = . 1 + 1. 4 + 1 +   2 + (1 + 3)3 (4)Torque about Joint 2M2 =  . 2 + 3. 3 (5)For each DOF we add the math, gets more complicated, and the joint weights get heavier. We will also see that shorter armlengths allow for smaller torque requirements is as shown in Fig.4. Where W1 = 0.5 N, W 2 = 0.25 N, W 3 = 0.25 N, W4 = 0. 5 N.L1 = 20 cm, L2 = 10 cm, L3 =15 cm and M1 =180 , M2 =90Fig. 4 Load on joints and DOFWhere, as shown in Fig. 4 has 1 = 360o ,  2 = 270o , 3 =180o and  4 = 90o . Generally arms are described by their degree offreedom (DOF). This number typically refers to the number of single-axis rotational joints in the arm. Higher DOF indicates anincreased flexibility. There are mainly 6 degrees of freedom per robotic arm. Six degrees of freedom (6DoF) refers to thefreedom of movement of a rigid body in three-dimensional space.DOF = Number of joints in robotic armRobotic arm is designed with two servo motors, so there are two joints in arm, can be called 2 degree of freedom. Here the armis designed with 2 DOF, which is sufficient for this application. They are up-down, open-close. According to datasheet of servomotor stall torque is 11 kg/cm for 4.8V (operating voltage) and 13.5 kg/cm for 6V. Hence maximum load on both the motorsshould be 0.51kg approximately.V. RESULTSThis android robot vehicle is designed by metal plates. The prototype design of vehicle is shown Fig.5.This vehicle is guidedby operator with android phone. Wireless signals are, sent from android and are received by HC-05 Bluetooth module to themicrocontroller Atmega 328. Vehicle follows commands from android, after it reaches to fire, command of program stops thevehicle and sends information of victims in fire accidents.PROTEUS JOURNALVOLUME 11 ISSUE 6 2020ISSN/eISSN: 0889-6348http://proteusresearch.org/ Page No: 15
Fig. 5 Prototype Design SetupThis is the dataflow of the system. For this purpose an android application is developed and it is a snapshot of Androidapplication as shown in Fig.11. We have implemented innovative fire alarming system to save victims in fire accidents usingandroid and also android application is designed to control the vehicle remotely with the help of Android application and resultof it is shown in Fig. 6. Use of this vehicle can save number of fire victims.Fig. 6 Robot controlling by Bluetooth operationThis vehicle is based on android phone. But there are many other ways to control it. Other technique is self operated byusing sensors, but it may result in delayed output and accuracy is also less. Hence the android control technique is superior.Table IIIROBOTIC COMMANDSSr. No. Commands Particulars1. Griper Open Gripper starts opening2. Griper Close Gripper starts closing3. Forward Vehicle starts moving forward4. Backward Vehicle starts moving backward5. Left Forward Vehicle left side wheel starts moving forward6. Left Backward Vehicle left side wheel starts moving backward7. Right Forward Vehicle right side wheel starts moving forward8. Right Backward Vehicle right side wheel starts moving backward9. Elbow Upward Robotic arm elbow starts moving upward10. Elbow Downward Robotic arm elbow starts moving downward.It starts alarming with the help of IR flame sensor and buzzer which gives alert. Also victims are saved by PIR sensor.Vehicle is controlled by android phone. The relation between input from android phone and corresponding outputs are shown inbelow table III. conclude that main objective of this work is to develop an embedded system based application to operate therobotic arm. It has been developed by integrating features of all the hardware components used.VI. CONCLUSIONSWe Presence of every module has been reasoned out and placed carefully, thus contributing to the best working of the unit.Robot is protected from fire and obstacles by sensors but one can use wireless camera for this purpose.REFERENCES[1] Akshay Deshmukh, Nikhil More, Shubham Nagare, V.B. Sarode “A Survey on Fire Detector and Extinguisher RobotControlled using Android Application – Blucontrol”, 5th International conference on recent development inengineering science, humanities and management ISBN 978-93-86171-39-9.[2] John Iovine., “Robots, Androids, and Animations 12 Incredible Projects You Can Build”, Second Edition, McGraw-Hill.2002. © 2016 IJEDR | Volume 4, Issue 2, ISSN- 2321-9939.[3] Naga Sudheer Ravela, Sainath Somisetty, Nagaraju Urlagunta, SambaSiva Rao Kopanaty, “Pick and Place Arm andRobotic Movement by using Android” international journal of innovative research in electrical, electronics,PROTEUS JOURNALVOLUME 11 ISSUE 6 2020ISSN/eISSN: 0889-6348http://proteusresearch.org/ Page No: 16
instrumentation and control engineering Vol. 4, Issue 3, March 2016 ISSN (Online) 2321 – 2004 ISSN (Print) 2321 –5526.[4] Dr. Mostafa Ranjbar, Dr. Davut Solyal, “Autonomous Fire Detection and Extinguishing Vehicle”. MENG 411Capstone Team Project Eastern Mediterranean University Faculty of Engineering.[5] Babu Ganesh.K, Hari Shankar.K, Kolanchi Mani.V, Thennarasu.S, Ramu. S. “Android Controlled Robotic ArmVehicle” In Advances in Natural and Applied Sciences, ISSN: 1995-0772, EISSN: 1998-1090 ANAS 2017 February11(2), pages 127-132[6] Butkar Vinayak D. B. E. Devikar Sandip, Jaybhaye Vikas, Prof. Shilpa Patharwalkar, “Android Based Pick and PlaceRobot”. IJIFR/ V2/ E4/ 011, Page No. 859-867.[7] Low Kot Hau, Gowrishankar Kasilingam, K. Nithiyananthan, “Development Of Prototype Model For Wireless BasedControlled Pick And Place Robotic Vehicle” TELKOMNIKA Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering Vol. 14,No. 1, April 2015, pp. 110 ~ 115 DOI: 10.11591/telkomnika.v14i1.7370.PROTEUS JOURNALVOLUME 11 ISSUE 6 2020ISSN/eISSN: 0889-6348http://proteusresearch.org/ Page No: 17
